---
layout: page
title: Criteria 1 - Critically appraise the use of digital technologies within a school context
permalink: /criteria_1/
---
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[Criteria 1](http://damienstpierre.com/criteria_1/)
[Criteria 2](http://damienstpierre.com/criteria_2/)
[Criteria 3](http://damienstpierre.com/criteria_3/)
[Criteria 4](http://damienstpierre.com/criteria_4/)
[Criteria 5](http://damienstpierre.com/criteria_5/)
[Criteria 6](http://damienstpierre.com/criteria_6/)
[Criteria 7](http://damienstpierre.com/criteria_7/)
[Criteria 8](http://damienstpierre.com/criteria_8/)
[Review](http://damienstpierre.com/criteria_review/)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Desmo’s main function as a graphics calculator and digital geometry software allows for multiple representation, which positively impacts learning.**

Early research on the ability of graphic calculators to impact mathematics
education within literature of the early 90’s by Penglase & Arnold (1996) showed
common perception that graphics calculators would be revolutionary for both
curriculum and instructional methods.

Drijvers & Doorman (1996) and Schwarz & Hershkowitz’s (1999) projected that
graphical calculators and similar technologies based on their early
investigations learning (functions and transformations) would be greatly
enhanced due to the expedient multiple representations they offer. Vaiyavutjamai
& Clements (2006) supported this proposing that digital technology use within a
functions based pedagogical framework will improve student academic out comes
and importantly multi relational understanding.

DGS are most impactful when used in either as an inquiry-based approach or
teacher-centric format. Chan & Leung’s (2014) meta-analysis of nine
quasi-experimental studies demonstrate teachers using post 2010 DGS with said
approach are most effective in increasing student’s mathematical achievement.

Desmos is the preferred suite compared to other apps, programs and calculators
for project based learning of graphing equations and inequalities due to its
easy-to-use, powerful and intuitive interface (Ebert, 2015)

Liang (2015) found Desmos provides an interactive, dynamic and persuasive
approach of teaching limits when utilising a conceptual conflict approach.

Montigo’s (2018) well designed 12 week study on the effect of Desmos versus
Ti-83 graphics calculators on mathematical achievement and student confidence in
problem solving showed there was a significant statistical difference in favour
of Desmos for both middle and high school students.

**Issues**

Chan & Leung’s (2014) showed DGS interventions less than 2 weeks in duration
were least effective and may be the result of novelty effects of DGS rather than
appropriate instructional design. Koklu & Topcu’s (2012) quasi experimental
supported this conclusion studying on effects of DGS assisted instruction on
student’s academic scores and commons misconception of quadratics.

Gray & Thomas (2001) investigated the value of conceptual use of graphical
calculators by students in a multiple representational environment. They found
that student academic outcomes were no greater than that of students receiving
only traditional instruction (pen & paper). There are significant factors
associated with the outcomes though considering Chan & Leung’s (2014) duration
findings; students had never used the graphics calculators before in the Gray &
Thomas (2001) investigation. Furthermore, DGS use only consisted of one period
of device familiarisation and three periods of instruction with the system.

Pierce, Stacey, Wander, & Ball (2011) explored how to best teach with multiple
representations and identify teacher pedagogical choices that might be
responsible for the discouraging results of the above studies. Through an
adaptive design cycle, they identified several items of consideration that all
teachers should be cognisant of when utilising digital technologies to generate
multi-representations; primarily negative results were likely due to the
Intrinsic cognitive load imposed on students as a result of distributed formats
and hence increases with every representation added (Pierce et al., 2011).

Cognitive load theory can be surmised as the brain only being able to process a
small amount of new information (working memory) at once but a large amount of
stored information (long term memory) (Centre for Education Statistics and
Evaluation, 2017).

Pierce et al. (2011) found four areas teacher can easily reduce cognitive load
when implementing DGS: Variable naming – software is unable to provide seamless
link between representations due the fundamental difference between mathematical
variables and computer variables. Clutter – using prepared simple display
screens saves times and ensures the focus is on mathematics rather than
technology use. Motivation – when implementing multiple representations all
representations used must have purpose and bring new learning rather than
repetition. Clear lesson focus – with short lesson sequences and time
constraints careful choices must be made to select the most purposeful
representations for the topic.

Mathematical high school education studies such as O’Connor & Norton (2016) that
did not incorporate digital technologies generally drew on the literature above
recommending the incorporation of multiple representations as a solution to
student’s difficulties without considering cognitive load.

**Conclusions**

When utilising graphics calculators and DGS to generate multiple representations
consideration must be given to the number and purpose of representations used.
To help alleviate cognitive load issues following Pierce et al. (2011) four
guidelines is recommneded:

\- be cognisint of the the possible conflict between mathimatic variables and
computer variables.

\- prepared screens increase effeciency but students need longer time to
familirise themselves with rather than screens they created themselves.

\- each representation must be adding new information rather than just a
repition for the sake of it.

\- any representation used must be the most appropriate to learning goal.

Furthermore, any implementation of the use of graphical digital technologies
must be accompanied by a significant investment in student familiarisation as
shown by Gray & Thomas (2001) with the overall tool before focusing on
individual mathematical learning outcomes.


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
**References**

Centre for Education Statistics and Evaluation. (2017). Cognitive load theory:
Research that teachers really need to understand. Retrieved from
www.cese.nsw.gov.au

Chan, K. K., & Leung, S. W. (2014). Dynamic geometry software improves
mathematical achievement: Systematic review and meta-analysis. *Journal of
Educational Computing Research*, *51*(3), 311–325.

Drijvers, P., & Doorman, M. (1996). The graphics calculator in mathematics
education. *The Journal of Mathematical Behavior*, *15*(4), 425–440.

Ebert, D. (2015). Graphing Projects with Desmos. *The Mathematics Teacher*,
*108*(5), 388. https://doi.org/10.5951/mathteacher.108.5.0388

Gray, R., & Thomas, M. O. J. (2001). Quadratic equation representations and
graphic calculators: Procedural and conceptual interactions. In *Proceedings of
the 24th Mathematics Education Research Group of Australasia Conference* (pp.
257–264).

Koklu, O., & Topcu, A. (2012). Effect of Cabri-assisted instruction on secondary
school students’ misconceptions about graphs of quadratic functions.
*International Journal of Mathematical Education in Science and Technology*,
*43*(8), 999–1011.

Liang, S. (2015). Teaching the Concept of Limit by Using Conceptual Conflict
Strategy and Desmos Graphing Calculator. *International Journal of Research in
Education and Science*, *2*(1), 35. https://doi.org/10.21890/ijres.62743

Montijo, E. (2018). *The effects of Desmos and TI-83 Plus graphing calculators
on the problem-solving confidence of middle and high school mathematics
students. Dissertation Abstracts International Section A: Humanities and Social
Sciences*. ProQuest Information & Learning. Retrieved from
http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&db=psyh&AN=2017-29361-010&site=ehost-live

O’Connor, B. R., & Norton, S. (2016). Investigating Students’ Mathematical
Difficulties with Quadratic Equations. *Mathematics Education Research Group of
Australasia*.

Penglase, M., & Arnold, S. (1996). The graphics calculator in mathematics
education: A critical review of recent research. *Mathematics Education Research
Journal*, *8*(1), 58–90.

Pierce, R., Stacey, K., Wander, R., & Ball, L. (2011). The design of lessons
using mathematics analysis software to support multiple representations in
secondary school mathematics. *Technology, Pedagogy and Education*, *20*(1),
95–112.

Schwarz, B. B., & Hershkowitz, R. (1999). Prototypes: Brakes or levers in
learning the function concept? The role of computer tools. *Journal for Research
in Mathematics Education*, *30*, 362–389.

Vaiyavutjamai, P., & Ken Clements, M. A. (2006). Effects of classroom
instruction on students’ understanding of quadratic equations. *Mathematics
Education Research Journal*. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03217429
