---
layout: page
title: Criteria 8 – Reflect on planned use of digital technologies and anticipated student learning outcomes
permalink: /criteria_8/
---

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Initial thoughts**

Having used Desmos previously in the classroom I know it to be an engaging and
powerful tool for student learning. I am concerned though that this was due to
the novelty factor of using a DGS as described by Koklu & Topcu (2012). I have
asked myself if the learning activities format will become stale and predictable
to students as the unit moves on. I believe though, if appropriate
activities/learning tasks of correct difficulty are utilised that are driven by
student inquiry they unit of learning will be successful.

**Reflections on Desmos as a DGS**

-   Positives come from the use of multiple representations (O’Connor & Norton,
    2016).

-   Care must be given to cognitive load generated by said multiple
    representations (Pierce, Stacey, Wander, & Ball, 2011)

-   Incremental implementation of Desmos and its functions is critical to not
    overwhelming students.

**Personalised learning**

-   To ensure buy in I must model play and experimentation, student’s must be
    comfortable in the affect/environment of the place of learning (Tomlinson,
    2001). Furthermore, with a significant shift towards inquiry based learning
    I need to ensure students adopt a growth mindset to persist with
    investigative tasks (Dweck, 2015) contained within Desmos.

-   The use of Desmos as planned primarily focuses on differentiation of content
    and product. In future I would like to further develop methods of
    differentiating for process and student interest, hence my desire to develop
    the ability to self-build learning activities.

-   Given the Desmos strength catering content and product variability this must
    not be negated by teacher over control or lack of planning. All material
    must be made available from the start to ensure student can progress how
    they desire and feel comfortable.

**Cyber safety and privacy**

-   Expectations regarding cyberbullying, safety and privacy will need to be
    covered from the beginning of the unit and revisited regularly. Student
    signup to Desmos will be checked to ensure usernames do not contain personal
    information.

**Expected student outcomes**

-   Considering the literature related to DGS’s and Desmos it is expected that
    student learning growth will be better than previous years. To be more
    specific, students will have a greater conceptual understanding of the
    relationship between functions and their graphical representations.

-   If it is found that the planned use does not improve student growth or had a
    negative impact, then feedback must be sought from both students and
    teachers on the implementation, possible issues and future recommendations.
    To better avoid this, I should perform a mini review at the end of every
    week to better analysis the impact of the intervention. If I use Desmos
    effectively to track student progress and as a formative tool then at no
    stage should I be surprised or unaware of progress or any issues that may be
    developing.

**Final Conclusion**

-   Desmos provides a flexible learning tool that meets all the tasks present on
    the social constructivist digital literacy (SCDL) framework (Reynolds,
    2016).

-   Desmos also provides for high and low order thinking skills supporting all
    learners during their knowledge development

-   Minimal risk associated with digital privacy and safety, but I must still be
    vigilant and provide clear guidance and expectations to students.

-   I look forward to further developing my skills with Desmos and the activity
    builder to better meet the need of my learners as they develop or meet
    contextual factors.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dweck, C. (2015). Carol Dweck revisits the growth mindset. *Education Week*,
*35*(5), 20–24.

Koklu, O., & Topcu, A. (2012). Effect of Cabri-assisted instruction on secondary
school students’ misconceptions about graphs of quadratic functions.
*International Journal of Mathematical Education in Science and Technology*,
*43*(8), 999–1011.

O’Connor, B. R., & Norton, S. (2016). Investigating Students’ Mathematical
Difficulties with Quadratic Equations. *Mathematics Education Research Group of
Australasia*.

Pierce, R., Stacey, K., Wander, R., & Ball, L. (2011). The design of lessons
using mathematics analysis software to support multiple representations in
secondary school mathematics. *Technology, Pedagogy and Education*, *20*(1),
95–112.

Reynolds, R. (2016). Defining, designing for, and measuring “social
constructivist digital literacy” development in learners: A proposed framework.
*Educational Technology Research and Development*, *64*(4), 735–762.

Tomlinson, C. A. (2001). *How to Differentiate Instruction in Mixed-Ability
Classrooms*. Alexandria: Pearson.
